Life and Evolution in Computers
Melanie Mitchell∗
Biophysics Group
Los Alamos National Laboratory
1
Computers and Life
Can we build computers that are intelligent and alive? This question has been on the minds
of computer scientists since the dawn of the computer age and remains a most compelling
line of inquiry. Some would argue that the question makes sense only if we put scare quotes
around “intelligent” and “alive,” since we’re talking about computers, after all, not biological
organisms. My own view is that the answer is unequivocally yes, no scare quotes or other
punctuation needed, but that to get there our notions of life, intelligence, and computation
will have to be deepened considerably.
You can ask ten biologists what are the ten (or 20 or 100) key requisites for life and you’ll
get a diﬀerent list each time. But most are likely to include autonomy, metabolism, self-
reproduction, survival instinct, and evolution and adaptation. As a start, can we understand
these processes mechanistically and capture them in computers?
Many people have argued a vehement “no” for the following reasons:
Autonomy: “A computer can’t do anything on its own; it can do only what humans
program it to do.”
Metabolism: “Computers can’t create or gather their own energy from their environ-
ment like living organisms do; they have to be fed energy (e.g., electricity) by humans.”
Self-reproduction: “A computer can’t reproduce itself; to do so it would have to contain
a description of itself, and that description would have to contain a description of itself,
and so on ad inﬁnitum.”
Survival instinct: “Computers don’t care whether they survive or not.” (For example,
from an editorial in the Boston Globe: “Deep Blue may have beat Kasparov, but it
didn’t get any joy out of it.”)
∗Address: P-21, MS D454, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545. Email: mmitchell@lanl.gov
1
Evolution and adaptation: “A computer can’t evolve or adapt on its own; it is restricted
to change only in ways speciﬁed ahead of time by its programmer.”
Although these arguments are still believed by a great many people, all of them have been
disproven in one way or another in the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Life (Langton 1989; Langton et al.,
1992; Langton 1993; Langton, 1995; Langton & Shimohara, 1997; Brooks & Maes, 1994). In
this paper I will focus on those issues most closely related to Darwinism—self-reproduction
and evolution.
2
Self-Reproduction in Computers
The “self-reproduction” argument above is the most mathematical one: it states that repro-
duction in a computer would lead to an inﬁnite regress. Consider, for example, the simplest
version of the computer self-reproduction problem: write a computer program to print out
an exact copy of itself and nothing else. Consider the following attempt. I start out with
the name of the program:
program copy
Now I need to add an instruction to print out the name of the program:
program copy
print("program copy");
(In this computer language, every instruction has to end with a semicolon.) Now I need to
add a line to print out that second line:
program copy
print("program copy");
print("
print("program copy");");
Note that the second print command has to include the four spaces before the ﬁrst print
command. Now I need another line to print out that third line:
program copy
print("program copy");
print("
print("program copy");");
print("
print("
print("program copy");");");
and so on. You can see how I am getting into an inﬁnite regress. How can this be avoided?
Before reading on, you might spend a few moments trying to solve this puzzle.
This simple sounding problem turns out to be a non-trivial conceptual exercise with echos
in the work of Kurt G¨odel and Alan Turing, which profoundly shook up the world of math-
ematics earlier in the 20th century. The solution also contains the essence of how biological
2
instruction
pointer
1    program test
2           print("Hello, world!);
3           print("Goodbye.");
4    end
5
.
.
.
Figure 1: A simpliﬁed picture of computer memory, with numbered locations 1–5 and beyond,
four of which contain lines of a program. The instruction pointer points to the instruction
currently being executed by the computer.
systems themselves get around the inﬁnite regress. The solution was originally found, in the
context of a more complicated problem, by the mathematician John von Neumann.
Von Neumann was a pioneer in ﬁelds ranging from quantum mechanics to economics,
and a designer of one of the earliest electronic computers. His design consisted of a central
processing unit which communicates with a random access memory in which both programs
and data can be stored. It remains the basic design of all standard computers today. He
was also one of the ﬁrst scientists who thought deeply about connections between compu-
tation and biology. He dedicated the last years of his life to solving the problem of how a
computer might be able to reproduce itself; his solution was the ﬁrst complete design for a
self-reproducing machine. The self-copying computer program I will show you was inspired
by his “self-reproducing automaton” and illustrates its fundamental principle in a simpliﬁed
way.
Before showing you the self-copying program, I need to explain a few things about the
programming language I will be using. It is actually a simpliﬁed pseudo-language. You won’t
need to know much about computer programming to understand the program.
Consider the picture of computer memory given in Figure 1. Computer memory, in our
highly simpliﬁed case, consists of numbered locations or “addresses,” numbered 1–5 and
beyond. Here each location contains some text. These lines of text can be interpreted by
the computer as commands in a program or as data to be used by a program. The program
currently stored in memory, when executed, will print
Hello, world!
Goodbye.
3
At any given time during the program’s execution, the computer’s “instruction pointer”
contains the memory location of the instruction currently being executed by the computer.
In our pseudo-language, there is a variable mem which gives that location. For example, in
Figure 1, the instruction pointer is pointing to the line “print(“Hello, world!”);” and mem is
equal to 2.
A second variable, line, is equal to the string of characters in memory location n. For
example, the command print(line(2)); will print
print("Hello, world!");
Finally, our language contains a loop command.
For example, the following lines of
computer code,
x = 0;
loop until x = 4
{
print("Hello, world!");
x = x + 1;
}
will print
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
Hello, world!
The variable x is used as a counter—it starts oﬀat zero and is incremented each time the
loop is performed. When it gets to 4, the loop is exited.
Now we are ready for the self-copying program, which appears in Figure 2. The best way
to understand a computer program is to hand-simulate it; that is, to go through it line by
line keeping track of what it does.
When the user types “copy”, this signals the computer to start interpreting the program
called copy. The interpreter sets the instruction pointer to location 1, containing the name
of the program. It then moves down, line by line, executing each instruction.
In location 2 a variable L is set to mem+1. Recall that mem is the location of the instruction
currently being executed—here, 2. So L is set to 2 + 1 = 3. Next, the program prints out
the ﬁrst two lines of the program:
program copy
L = mem + 1;
4
1  program copy
2         L = mem + 1;
3         print("program copy");
4         print("       L = mem + 1;");
5         loop until line[L] = "end"
6         {
7                print(line[L]);
8                L = L + 1;
9         }
10        print("end");
 11 end
   
Figure 2: A self-copying program.
Next, a loop is entered which will be iterated until line(L) is equal to “end”. Remember
that line(L) is equal to the string located in memory location L. Right now, L is set to 3,
so line(L) is equal to “
print(“program copy”);”. This is not equal to “end”, so the loop
is entered. In the loop, line[L] is printed and L is incremented. First, with L= 3,
print("program copy");
is printed, and L is set to 4. Now, line[L] is the fourth line of the program:
print("
L = mem + 1;");
Again, this is not equal to “end”, so the loop is continued. In this way, each line of the
program is printed out. A particularly interesting line is line 7 itself: when line 7 is being
executed with L= 7, the instruction “print(line[L])” prints itself out.
When L= 11 and
line[L] is equal to “end”, the loop ends. At this point, lines 1–10 have been printed. The
instruction pointer moves to line 10 (the instruction immediately following the loop), which,
when executed, prints out the string “end”, completing the self-copying.
The essence of self-copying in this program was to use the same information stored in
memory in two ways: ﬁrst as instructions to be executed, and second as data to be used
(i.e., printed) by those instructions.
This dual use of information is what allows us to
avoid an inﬁnite regress of the kind illustrated earlier by our ﬁrst attempt at a self-copying
program. It is also at the essence of biological self-reproduction. DNA is made up of strings
of nucleotides, which encode amino acids making up proteins, including the enzymes which
eﬀect the splitting of the double helix and the copying of each strand via messenger RNA,
transfer RNA, ribosomes, and so on. In a very crude analogy, the DNA encoding the enzymes
that eﬀect copying roughly correspond to the lines of code in the self-copying program. These
5
“lines of code” in DNA are executed when the enzymes are created and act on the DNA
itself, interpreting it as data to be split up and copied.
A major diﬀerence between the self-copying program above and DNA self-reproduction is
that the self-copying program required an interpreter to execute it: an instruction pointer
to move one by one down the lines of computer code and a computer operating system to
carry them out (e.g., actually perform the storing and retrieving of internal variables like
mem and L, actually print strings of characters, and so on). The interpreter is completely
external to the program itself. However, in the case of DNA, the instructions for building the
“interpreter”—the messenger RNA, transfer RNA, ribosomes, and all the other machinery
of protein synthesis—are encoded along with everything else in the DNA. Von Neumann’s
original self-reproducing automaton also contained not only a self-copying program but also
the machinery needed for its own interpretation. Thus it was truly a self-reproducing ma-
chine. That it was formulated in the 1950s, before the details of biological self-reproduction
were well understood, is testament to von Neumann’s insight. Von Neumann’s design and
mathematical proofs of its correctness were eventually published in 1966 as a book, Theory
of Self Reproducing Automata (von Neumann, 1966), completed and edited by his colleague
Arthur Burks. (See Burks, 1970 and Mitchell, 1998 for descriptions of von Neumann’s self-
replicating automaton. See Chapter 16 of Hofstadter, 1979 for an account of self-replication
in DNA and how it relates to mathematical logic and self-copying computer programs.)
Von Neumann’s design for a self-reproducing automaton was one of the ﬁrst real advances
in the science of artiﬁcial life. He recognized it as such, and accordingly took it very seriously,
saying that he wanted no mention of the “reproductive potentialities of the machines of the
future” made to the mass media.
3
Evolution in Computers
After he answered the question “Can a machine reproduce itself?” in the aﬃrmative, von
Neumann wanted to take the next logical step and have computers (or computer programs)
reproduce themselves with mutations and compete for resources to survive in some environ-
ment. This would counter the “survival instinct” and “evolution and adaptation” arguments
mentioned above. However, von Neumann died in 1957 without being able to work on the
evolution problem.
Others quickly took up where he left oﬀ. By the early 1960s, several groups of researchers
were experimenting with evolution in computers. Such work has come to be known col-
lectively as “evolutionary computation” (Fogel, 1995).
The most widely known of these
eﬀorts today was the work on genetic algorithms done by John Holland and his students and
colleagues at the University of Michigan (Holland, 1992; Goldberg, 1989; Mitchell, 1996).
A genetic algorithm (GA) is an idealized computational version of Darwinian evolution. In
Darwinian evolution, organisms reproduce at diﬀerential rates, with ﬁtter organisms produc-
ing more oﬀspring than less ﬁt ones. Oﬀspring inherit traits from their parents; those traits
are inherited with variation via random mutation, sexual recombination, and other sources
of variation. Thus traits that lead to higher reproductive rates get preferentially spread in
6
the population, and new traits can arise via variation. In GAs, computer “organisms”—e.g.,
computer programs encoded as strings of ones and zeros (bit strings)—reproduce in propor-
tion to their ﬁtness in the environment, where ﬁtness is a measure of how well an organism
solves a given problem. Oﬀspring inherit traits from their parents with variation coming
from random mutation, in which parts of an organism are changed at random, and sexual
reproduction, in which an organism is made up of recombined parts coming from its parents.
Assume the individuals in the population are computer programs encoded as bit strings.
The following is a simple genetic algorithm.
1. Generate a random initial population of M individuals.
Repeat the following for N generations:
2. Calculate the ﬁtness of each individual in the population. (The user must deﬁne a
function assigning a numerical ﬁtness to each individual. For example, if the individuals
represent computer programs, the ﬁtness of an individual is calculated by running the
corresponding computer program and seeing how well it does on a given task.)
3. Repeat until the new population has M individuals:
(a) Choose two parent individuals from the current population probabilistically as a
function of ﬁtness.
(b) Cross them over at a randomly chosen locus to produce an oﬀspring. That is,
choose a position in each bit string, form one oﬀspring by taking the bits before
that position from one parent and after that position from the other parent.
(c) Mutate each locus in the oﬀspring with a small probability.
(d) Put the oﬀspring in the new population.
4. Go to step 2 with the new population.
This process is iterated for many generations, at which point hopefully one or more high-
ﬁtness individuals have been created.
Notice that reproduction in the simple GA consists merely of copying parts of bit strings—
von Neumann’s complicated design for self-reproduction is avoided by having an external
copying routine. This is because research on GAs is typically aimed at solving computa-
tional problems via evolution and at investigating evolutionary dynamics in an idealized
setting rather than trying to capture all the facets of evolution in biological systems (self-
reproduction, complex genotype-to-phenotype mappings via development, and so on).
The simple GA given above is simple indeed, but versions of it that are only slightly more
complex have been used to solve problems in many scientiﬁc and engineering disciplines.
GAs in one form or another have been used for numerical optimization, circuit design,
factory scheduling, drug design, telecommunications network optimization, robot navigation,
ﬁnancial-market prediction, and models of the immune system, the economy, and population
genetics, to name a few of the areas in which these algorithms have been applied.
7
4
Evolving Parallel, Decentralized Computing Systems
A major eﬀort in computer science is the development of massively parallel computing sys-
tems. A goal is to eventually build systems with thousands or millions of relatively simple
processors working in parallel, each following its own set of instructions and communicating
with only a small number of other processors, and no central controller telling each proces-
sor what to do. In principle the collective behavior of such a system would allow problems
to be solved very quickly that no single processor or small group of processors could solve
eﬃciently alone.
Such parallel, decentralized systems contrast with the traditional architecture for com-
puters in which a single central processing unit (CPU) communicating with a random-access
memory runs a single program, one step at a time. This traditional architecture is known
as a “von-Neumann-style architecture” since it follows von Neumann’s and colleagues’ orig-
inal design for programmable computers. It has been extended to parallel processing, where
typically one processor plays the role of a central controller for the other processors.
Massively parallel, decentralized computing systems as described above are more like
biological systems than are traditional computers. For example, the brain is a massively
parallel system of billions of tiny processors (neurons) with limited communication with one
another and no central controller running the show. Instead the collective actions of the
neurons (and their attendant synapses, neurotransmitters, etc.) lead to the states we call
“thinking”, “consciousness”, and so on in ways we do not yet understand very well. Other
complex systems in the living world, such as ant colonies or the immune system, have similar
decentralized architectures and similarly “emergent” collective abilities.
These biological systems have many properties that are desired in computational systems.
First, such systems, particularly neural systems, are extremely fast and capable at performing
tasks such as recognizing complex patterns and responding in appropriate ways that are still
far beyond the abilities of current computers. Second, biological systems are robust, in that
if some processors (neurons, ants, white blood cells) fail, the whole system does not come to
a crashing halt like a traditional computer would, but is able to keep running, usually quite
satisfactorily. Third, biological systems are very good at adapting to changing circumstances.
Such adaptability is essential for intelligence and autonomy in the real world.
For these reasons, building computer systems that are, like living systems, massively
parallel and decentralized, is an important goal of computer science. The diﬃculty, however,
is that such systems are very diﬃcult to design, program, and control, precisely because
of their decentralized nature. Some computer scientists, including myself, believe that a
promising avenue is to go one step further in mimicking nature: to use evolution, in the form
of genetic algorithms or other evolutionary computation approaches, to design such systems
rather than to engineer them ourselves by hand.
8
Figure 3: Illustration of a 2D cellular automaton.
(a) The two dimensional lattice.
(b)
Illustration of a cell’s neighborhood: here cell 0 and its 8 neighbors.
5
Cellular Automata
My colleagues and I have attempted an idealized version of this long-term project by using
genetic algorithms to design cellular automata to perform computations. Sections 6–9 below
summarize some of our previously published work (Crutchﬁeld & Mitchell, 1995; Das, 1998;
Das, Mitchell, & Crutchﬁeld, 1994; Mitchell, Crutchﬁeld, & Das, 1996).
Cellular automata (CAs) are idealized versions of the massively parallel, decentralized
computing systems I described above. A CA is a large network of simple processors, with
limited communication among the processors and no central control, that can produce very
complex dynamics from simple rules of operation. A two-dimensional cellular automaton
is illustrated in Figure 3. It consists of a two-dimensional lattice of “cells”, represented as
squares in the ﬁgure, each of which communicates with the 8 cells that surround it. These
8 cells along with the cell itself is known as the “neighborhood” of a cell. Each cell starts
out at time t = 0 as either in the black state (“on”) or in the white state (“oﬀ”). The whole
pattern of states at t = 0 is called the “initial conﬁguration”. The cellular automaton iterates
over a series of discrete time steps (t = 1, 2, 3, . . .). At each time step, each cell updates its
state as a function of its current state and the current state of the 8 neighbors to which it is
connected. (The boundary cells are dealt with by having the whole lattice wrap around into
a torus—thus boundary cells are connected to “adjacent” cells on the opposite boundary.)
Each cell uses the same function for updating its state and all cells update synchronously in
parallel at each time step. For example, the well-known Game of Life (Berlekamp, Conway,
& Guy, 1982) is a two-dimensional cellular automaton with the following update function
followed by each cell:
If the cell is white at time t, it will turn black at t + 1 if exactly three of its eight
neighbors are black at time t; otherwise it will stay white at t + 1.
9
(b) Rule: 
(c) Iteration of CA:
t = 0
t = 1
t = 2
t = 3
(a) CA lattice: 
Figure 4: Illustration of a one-dimensional CA. (a) CA lattice at t = 0. (b) The rule table
for this CA. (c) Iteration of the CA for three time-steps.
If the cell is black at time t, it will stay black at t + 1 if two or three of its eight
neighbors are black at time t. Otherwise it will turn white at t + 1 .
As readers who have seen the Game of Life on their computer screen-savers (or other
places) will know, these simple rules can lead to very complicated behavior.
Being massively parallel decentralized systems, cellular automata are quintessential ex-
amples of a “non-von-Neumann-style” computer architecture, as it is called in the computer
science community. This is ironic, since von Neumann himself was one of the inventors of
cellular automata. In fact, von Neumann’s self-reproducing automaton was itself embedded
in a cellular automaton.
In our project on evolving cellular automata with genetic algorithms, we focussed our
attention on the simplest type of cellular automaton—one dimensional arrays of cells. A
one-dimensional cellular automaton and its rule table (or “rule”) are illustrated in Figure 4.
A one-dimensional lattice of 11 cells is illustrated in Figure 4a. Here each cell is connected to
its two immediate neighbors, and the ends of the lattice wrap around in a circle, so the right-
hand neighbor of the rightmost cell is the leftmost cell and vice versa. Let a “neighborhood”
of a cell be deﬁned as the cell itself and the other neighbors to which it is connected. The
update rule is given as a table which lists the eight possible neighborhood conﬁgurations
formed by a neighborhood of three cells, and the state that the center cell takes on at time
t + 1 if it is in the corresponding conﬁguration at time t (Figure 4b). For example, a white
cell surrounded by two black cells at time t will turn black at time t + 1. The iteration of
the rule over four time steps, starting from a random initial conﬁguration of cell states at
t = 0, is illustrated in Figure 4c.
Figure 5 displays a “space-time diagram” illustrating the behavior of this cellular au-
10
0
Time
148
148
Site
0
Figure 5: A space-time diagram, illustrating the behavior of the CA rule given in Figure 4b
on a lattice of 149 cells, iterated from a random initial conﬁguration for 148 time steps. This
diagram and all other space-time diagrams in this paper were generated with la1d, a cellular
automaton simulation and graphics package written by James P. Crutchﬁeld.
tomata on a larger array (149 cells), iterated for 148 time steps. As before, the cells in the
one-dimensional CA are arrayed horizontally, with black representing the “on” state and
white the “oﬀ” state, and time increases down the page. At this larger scale, complicated-
looking patterns start to emerge—white triangles of diﬀerent sizes appearing in irregular-
seeming ways throughout the space-time diagram. In principle, given the eight update rules
of Figure 4b, this cellular automaton’s behavior is completely speciﬁed in a very simple way.
But in practice it is very diﬃcult to predict the long-term behavior of the cellular automa-
ton starting from a given initial conﬁguration—e.g., when a triangle of a certain size will
appear—without actually iterating it.
Thus in cellular automata very simple rules can produce very complicated dynamics.
Our group’s question was, can the complex dynamics be harnessed by evolution to perform
sophisticated collective information processing, as it is in living systems?
6
A Task for Cellular Automata Requiring Collective
Information Processing
To answer this question, we looked at a task for cellular automata—the “density classiﬁca-
tion” task—that requires collective information processing. The task is to decide whether
11
0
Time
148
148
Site
0
148
Site
0
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Space-time behavior of the majority CA from two random initial conﬁgurations:
(a) majority white; (b) majority black.
or not the initial conﬁguration of cell states has a majority of black cells (“high density”).
If yes, then after some number of iterations all cells should turn black and stay black. If no,
then after some number of iterations all cells should turn white and stay white. This task
was ﬁrst used for studying collective computation in cellular automata by Packard (1988).
The goal is to design a cellular automaton that can perform this task for a large set of initial
conﬁgurations. For this task we used one-dimensional CAs where each cell is connected to
three cells on either side, so the number of cells in each neighborhood is 7.
This task would be trivial for a system with a central controller or central storage of
some kind, such as a von Neumann-style computer: it would be a simple matter for the
central controller to count up the number of black states, saving the intermediate sum in a
register, and then divide the total by the lattice length. However, it is nontrivial to design a
decentralized system with limited communication among components to perform this task.
It has been proven that no CA of the type we are using can perform this task perfectly
(Land & Belew, 1995), but even to perform this task reasonably well requires more powerful
computation than can be performed by a single cell or any linear combination of cells. Since
the black cells can be distributed throughout the lattice, the CA must transfer information
over large distances and process information collected from diﬀerent parts of the lattice. To
do this requires the global coordination of cells that are separated by large distances and
that cannot communicate directly.
The need for such coordination is illustrated in Figure 6, which displays the space-time
behavior of a “naive” hand-designed candidate solution for this task—the “majority” CA
rule, called φmaj, which simply takes a majority vote in each neighborhood. The state each
cell becomes at time t is simply the state that is in the majority for that cell and its neighbors
at time t −1. As can be seen, over time local neighborhoods with majority of black states
converge to regions of all black and similarly for white, but when a black region and a white
12
0
0
1
0
1
CA rule:
128 entries
0 0 1 0 1 . . .
Representation of CA rule in GA population:
128 bits
Figure 7: Illustration of how a seven-cell-neighborhood 1D CA is represented as a bit string
for the GA. The CA rule table has 27 = 128 entries.
The GA bit string has 128 bits,
representing the output states in the rule table, in lexicographic order of neighborhood
conﬁguration.
region border each other, there is no way to decide between them, and both persist. Thus
φmaj does not perform the density classiﬁcation task.
Instead, more sophisticated coordination and information transfer must be achieved. This
coordination must, of course, happen in the absence of any central processor or central
memory directing the coordination.
7
Evolving Cellular Automata with Genetic Algorithms
We used a genetic algorithm to evolve cellular automata perform the density classiﬁcation
task. Each individual in the population is a bit string representing a cellular automaton rule
table. This is illustrated in Figure 7. We list all the 128 possible neighborhood conﬁgurations
of seven cells in lexicographic order, starting with the neighborhood of all white cells and
ending with the neighborhood of all black cells. Each neighborhood conﬁguration is listed
with an update state that the center cell becomes at the next time step. If we call the black
state “1” and the white state “0”, the update states, in order, form a bit string of length
128. Such bit strings are the individuals that undergo GA evolution.
In the initial generation a population of such bit strings is generated at random. The
ﬁtness of each is then calculated by translating the bit string into a CA rule and trying the
resulting CA out on a number of initial conﬁgurations of states. In a typical simulation,
the GA’s population was 100 CA rules. Each corresponding CA had 149 cells. Each CA
13
rule was tested on 100 initial conﬁgurations of cell states. A “trial” consisted of starting
at a given initial conﬁguration and then updating the 149 cells in parallel, using the given
rule table, until a ﬁxed conﬁguration was reached or until 298 time steps (twice the lattice
length) had elapsed, whichever happened ﬁrst. The ﬁtness of the CA rule was the fraction of
the 100 trials on which the CA reached the correct answer (a ﬁxed conﬁguration of all black
for initial majority black, all white for initial majority white) before the maximum number
of time steps elapsed.
After the ﬁtnesses of all the CA rules in the population were calculated, the genetic
algorithm selected the highest ﬁtness individuals to be parents and created a new population
via reproduction from those parents using crossover and mutation. The whole process was
then repeated for the new generation. The GA was run for 100 generations.
The algorithms involved and the parameters they use are explained in more detail in Das,
Mitchell, and Crutchﬁeld (1994) and Crutchﬁeld, Mitchell, and Das (1998). In our runs,
parallelism is simulated on a serial computer. To put the running time into perspective:
the GA evaluates a total of 10,000 CA rules (100 per generation times 100 generations).
This may seem like a lot, but consider that the number of possible CA rules with 7 cells
in a neighborhood is 2128, one of those numbers that far outstrips the number of particles
in the universe or anything else you probably care to imagine. Each of these 10,000 CA
rules are tested on 100 initial conﬁgurations, for a total of one million (106) CA trials
during a run of the GA. Each CA trial consists of (at most) 298 time steps. At each time
step 149 cells are updated. So the maximum number of cell updates during a GA run is
106 × 298 × 149, which is approximately 44 billion. Such a simulation would be far beyond
what von Neumann’s computers of the 1940s and 1950s would have been capable of in
reasonable time. However, with today’s fast hardware, this kind of extensive evolutionary
simulation is eminently feasible: each GA run takes less than two minutes on my 500 MH
Pentium III workstation.
8
Results of Evolution
We performed thousands of runs of the GA on this problem, and on many runs the GA found
high-performing CA rules that used sophisticated collective computation to perform the
density classiﬁcation task. (Detailed results of our simulations are described in Crutchﬁeld,
Mitchell, & Das, 1998.) The behavior of one of the best CA rules evolved by the GA is
illustrated in Figure 8. Call this rule φGA. In Figure 8(a), the initial conﬁguration has a
majority of black cells and eventually all cells become black and remain in that state; in
Figure 8(b), the initial conﬁguration has a majority of white cells and eventually all cells
become white and remain in that state. In both cases, φGA reaches the correct classiﬁcation.
When tested on a set of 10,000 randomly generated initial conﬁgurations on 149-cell lattices,
φGA reaches the correct classiﬁcation approximately 80% of the time. Such random initial
conﬁgurations are the hardest cases, since a randomly generated string of white and black
cells will have close to 50% of each state. The performance of φGA improves as the density
of black cells in the initial conﬁguration increases or decreases away from 50%.
14
148
Site
0
148
Site
0
0
Time
148
(a)
(b)
collision
white region
black region
Figure 8: Space-time behavior of φGA, one of the best evolved CA rules for the density
classiﬁcation task. In (a), the initial condition contains a majority of black cells and the CA
iterates to a ﬁxed conﬁguration of all black. In (b), the initial condition contains a majority
of white cells and the CA iterates to a ﬁxed conﬁguration of all white.
How does computation occur in φGA? In particular, how do the cells collectively obtain
and process the information in the initial conﬁguration? I will ﬁrst describe qualitatively
how φGA performs its density classiﬁcation, and then sketch our approach towards a more
quantitative description of computation in decentralized spatially extended systems like φGA.
In Figure 8 it can be seen that, under φGA, between time t = 0 and when all cells have
turned black or white there is a “transient” phase during which patterns are formed. It
is these patterns that transfer information about the density of black cells in local regions.
Roughly, over short times, φGA’s behavior is similar to that of φmaj in that local high-density
regions are mapped to all black, local low-density regions are mapped to all white, with a
vertical boundary in between them. This is what happens when a region of black cells on
the left meets a region of white cells on the right. However, there is a crucial diﬀerence from
φmaj: when a region of white cells on the left meets a region of black cells on the right, rather
than a vertical boundary being formed, a checkerboard region (alternating black and white
cells) is propagated. When the propagating checkerboard region collides with the vertical
black-white boundary, the inner region is cut oﬀand the outer region is allowed to propagate.
For example, in Figure 8a, the marked white region is smaller than the marked black region
that wraps around the edges—thus the propagating checkerboard pattern reaches the black-
white boundary on the white side before it reaches it on the black side; the former is cut
oﬀ, and the latter is allowed to propagate. In this way, the CA uses local interactions and
geometry to determine the relative sizes of adjacent large low and high density regions.
The black-white boundary and the checkerboard region can be thought of as signals indi-
15
148
Site
0
γ
η
β
δ
α
β
µ
148
Site
0
0
Time
148
Figure 9: The space-time diagram of Figure‘8(a) and its ﬁltered version, in which the regular
domains are colored white, leaving the boundaries between these domains (“particles”).
cating ambiguous regions. The creation and interactions of these signals can be interpreted
as collective information processing performed by the CA.
The above explanation of how φGA performs the density classiﬁcation task is informal and
incomplete. Can we understand more rigorously how the evolved CAs perform the desired
classiﬁcation? Understanding the products of GA evolution is a general problem—typically
the GA is asked to ﬁnd individuals that achieve high ﬁtness but is not told what traits the
individuals should have to attain such ﬁtness. This is analogous to the diﬃculty biologists
have in understanding the products of natural evolution. In the case of cellular automata,
the collective computation performed by a given CA is determined by its overall space-time
behavior, and is thus almost always impossible to extract from the rule table.
A more rigorous and quantitative description of information processing in CAs can be
obtained via Crutchﬁeld and Hanson’s “computational mechanics” approach. (Crutchﬁeld &
Hanson, 1993; Hanson & Crutchﬁeld, 1992). Crutchﬁeld and Hanson give a general method
for describing the “intrinsic computation” embedded in space-time behavior in terms of
“regular domains,” “particles,” and “particle interactions.” A detailed discussion of their
method requires knowledge of formal language theory and automata theory, and is beyond
the scope of this paper. Very brieﬂy, regular domains are simple-to-describe patterns such as
“all black”, “all white”, and “checkerboard.” Particles are the localized boundaries between
these patterns.
Figure 9 shows how the regular domains created by φGA can be ﬁltered
out, leaving the particles (here labeled with Greek letters).
Particles are interpreted as
information carriers, and collisions between particles are interpreted as the loci of information
processing.
For example, the α and β particles encode diﬀerent types of ambiguity in the initial con-
ﬁguration (large black and white regions bordering one another). α decays into γ and µ. γ
16
carries the information that it borders a white region and µ carries the information that it
borders a black region. These two particles, by having the same velocity, also carry the mu-
tual information of having come from the same ambiguous region in the initial conﬁguration.
When γ collides with β before µ does, the information contained in β and γ is combined to
deduce that the large initial white region was smaller than the large initial black region it
bordered. This new information is encoded in a newly created particle η, whose job is to
catch up with and annihilate the µ (and itself).
In Hordijk, Crutchﬁeld, and Mitchell (1998) and Hordijk (1999), it is shown how a de-
scription of information processing at the level of particles and their interactions can explain
and predict both qualitative and quantitative aspects of CA performance on the density-
classiﬁcation task and other tasks.
9
Evolutionary History of φGA
It is of interest to see how high-performance CAs like φGA come about under GA evolution.
Figure 10(a) plots the best ﬁtness in the population as a function of generation for the run
in which φGA evolved. Space-time diagrams illustrating the behaviors of the best CA rules
at generations 7, 8, 13, 17, and 18 are given in Figure 10(b)–(f). These were generations
at which particular innovations were discovered by the GA. At generation 7, the highest-
ﬁtness CA always immediately converges to all black from any initial conﬁguration. This,
of course, results in getting half the cases (the majority-black ones) correct, sort of like
answering “yes” to all yes/no questions. By generation 8, this “default” solution is improved
upon a bit—the CA will converge to all white if given a very low density initial conﬁguration
(not shown here). In addition, at generation 8 a checkerboard pattern begins to appear. At
this generation, the checkerboard pattern is not actually being used to increase ﬁtness; when
the CA rule is changed by hand to eliminate the checkerboard, the ﬁtness stays roughly the
same. The checkerboard-like pattern seen in generation 13 is likewise adaptively neutral.
However, evolution tinkers with this pattern (via crossover and mutation) and by generation
17 the checkerboard is central to the higher-ﬁtness strategy of the highest-ﬁtness CA at that
generation. Thus in this idealized world of a GA evolving CA rules, we see a key phenomenon
of evolution: adaptively neutral traits arise by accident and are later modiﬁed by evolution
to have adaptive signiﬁcance.
Between generation 17 and 18 there is a big jump in ﬁtness, partially due to the fact that
the black-to-white particle β (see Figure 9) changes from having a positive velocity (slanted
to the right) to a zero velocity (vertical). In generation 17, because β has a positive velocity
it expands black regions and shrinks white regions, allowing black an advantage over white.
This is seen in Figure 10(d), where, as it happens, the initial conﬁguration had a majority of
white cells, but the CA incorrectly converges to all black. In generation 18 (Figure 10(e)),
β has velocity zero so neither black nor white expand unfairly and the correct classiﬁcation
is reached. By generation 18, the basic computational strategy described for φGA has been
found, and from generation 18 on, no large improvements were made in ﬁtness.
This evolutionary history is given in more detail in terms of particles in Das, Mitchell,
17
 Gen 7
(b)
0
Time
148
148
Site
0
 Gen 13
(d)
148
Site
0
 Gen 8
(c)
148
Site
0
0
Time
148
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
10
20
30
Generation
Fitness
 Fitness vs. 
Generation
(a)
148
Site
0
 Gen 18
(f)
 Gen 17
(e)
148
Site
0
0
Time
148
Figure 10: (a) Plot of best ﬁtness in the population at each generation. (b)–(f): Space-time
behavior of the highest-ﬁtness CA in the population at generations 7, 8, 13, 17, and 18.
18
and Crutchﬁeld (1994), Crutchﬁeld, Mitchell, and Das (1998), and Hordijk (1999).
10
Conclusion
In this paper I’ve highlighted some approaches to building life-like computing systems: von
Neumann’s design of a self-reproducing automaton, illustrated by a self-copying program;
Holland and others’ invention of evolutionary computation methods such genetic algorithms;
and recent work by myself and colleagues on evolving cellular automata with collective
computing abilities.
This work, along with other research on artiﬁcial life and artiﬁcial
intelligence, demonstrates that we can create some of the attributes of life and intelligence,
such as self-reproduction, evolution, and adaptation, in machines, albeit in rudimentary
ways. Such in silico experiments give us what the philosopher Daniel Dennett has called
“intuition pumps” (Dennett, 1991): simple models that help us make sense of diﬃcult ideas
in a concrete rather than abstract way.
I believe that many concrete and progressively
realistic examples of such systems will be necessary for us to make sense of questions like
“Can we build computers that are intelligent and alive?” and to extend our intuitions about
what life is and what computers are and what they can be.
11
Acknowledgments
Sections 6–9 of this paper reviewed work done by past and present members of the Evolving
Cellular Automata group at the Santa Fe Institute: James P. Crutchﬁeld, Rajarshi Das,
Wim Hordijk, Peter Hraber, Melanie Mitchell, Erik van Nimwegen, and Cosma Shalizi. This
work was supported by the Santa Fe Institute and by National Science Foundation grants
IRI-9320200 and IRI-9705830 and Department of Energy grant DE-FG03-94ER25231.
12
References
Adami, C., 1998, Artiﬁcial Life VI, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Berlekamp, E., Conway, J.H., Guy, R., 1982, Winning ways for your mathematical plays,
Volume 2, New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brooks, R.A., Maes, P., 1994, Artiﬁcial Life IV, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Burks, A.W., 1970, ‘Von Neumann’s Self-Reproducing Automata’. In: Burks, A.W. (ed.)
Essays on Cellular Automata, Urbana, IL: Univerity of Illinois Press.
Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Hanson, J.E., 1993, ‘Turbulent Pattern Bases for Cellular Automata’,
Physica D, 69, 279-301.
Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Mitchell, M., 1995, ‘The Evolution of Emergent Computation’, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science U.S.A., 92, 10742–10746.
19
Available at www.santafe.edu/projects/evca/Papers/EvEmComp.html.
Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Mitchell, M., Das, R., 1998, ‘The Evolutionary Design of Collective Com-
putation in Cellular Automata’, Working Paper 98-09-080, Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe,
NM. Available at www.santafe.edu/projects/evca/Papers/EvDesign.html.
Das, R., 1998, The Evolution of Emergent Computation, Ph.D. Thesis, Colorado State Uni-
versity, Fort Collins, Colorado.
Das, R., Mitchell, M., Crutchﬁeld, J.P., 1994, ‘A Genetic Algorithm Discovers Particle-Based
Computation in Cellular Automata.” In Davidor, Y., Schwefel, H.-P., M¨anner, R. (eds.),
Parallel Problem Solving From Nature—PPSN III, Berlin: Springer-Verlag (Lecture Notes
in Computer Science), 344-353. Available at www.santafe.edu/projects/evca/Papers/GA-
Particle.html.
Dennett, D.C., 1991, Consciousness explained, Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Fogel, D.B., 1995, Evolutionary Computation: Toward a New Philosophy of Machine Intel-
ligence, New York: IEEE Press.
Goldberg, D.E., 1989, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning,
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hanson, J.E., Crutchﬁeld, J.P., 1992, ‘The Attractor-Basin Portrait of a Cellular Automa-
ton’, Journal of Statistical Physics, 66 (5/6), 1415-1462.
Hofstadter, D.R., 1979, G¨odel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid, New York: Basic
Books.
Holland, J.H., 1992, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. Second edition (First edition, 1975).
Hordijk, W., 1999. Dynamics, Emergent Computation, and Evolution in Cellular Automata,
Ph.D. Thesis, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Hordijk, W., Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Mitchell, M., 1998, ‘Mechanisms of Emergent Computa-
tion in Cellular Automata.’ In Eiben, A.E. (ed.), Parallel Problem Solving from Nature—
Proceedings Vth Workshop PPSN V, New York: Springer.
Available at www.santafe.edu/projects/evca/Papers/mecca.html.
Land, M., Belew, R.K., 1995, ‘No Perfect Two-State Cellular Automata for Density Classi-
ﬁcation Exists’, Physical Review Letters, 74 (25), 5148.
Langton, C.G. (editor), 1989, Artiﬁcial Life, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Langton, C.G. (editor), 1993, Artiﬁcial Life III, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Langton, C.G., 1995, Artiﬁcial Life: An Overview Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Langton, C.G., Shimohara, K., 1997 Artiﬁcial Life V, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Langton, C.G., Taylor, C., Farmer, J. D., Rasmussen, S. (editors), 1992, Artiﬁcial Life II,
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Mitchell, M., 1996, An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
20
Mitchell, M., 1998, ‘Computation in Cellular Automata: A Selected Review’. In Gramss,
T. et al. (eds.), Nonstandard Computation, Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH. Available at
www.santafe.edu/ mm/ca-review.html.
Mitchell, M., Crutchﬁeld, J.P., Das, R., 1996, ‘Evolving Cellular Automata to Perform Com-
putations: A Review of Recent Work.’ In Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Evolutionary Computation and its Applications (EvCA ’96), Moscow, Russia: Russian
Academy of Sciences. Available at www.santafe.edu/projects/evca/Papers/evca-review.html
Packard, N.H., 1988, ‘Adaptation Toward the Edge of Chaos.’ In Kelso, J.A.S., Mandell,
A.J., Shlesinger, M.F. (eds.), Dynamic Patterns in Complex Systems, Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc, 293–301.
von Neumann, J., 1966, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata (Edited and completed by A.
W. Burks), Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press
21
